---
title: "Cognitive Ability and Structured Interview Validity in Job Performance"
date: 2018-06-07
tags: [psychology, workplace]
header:
    image: "/images/alejandro-escamilla-1.jpg"
excerpt: "mployee selection is an essential process that all organizations undergo, but due to its expensive and time-consuming nature it is…"
---

<p>Employee selection is an essential process that all organizations undergo, but due to its expensive and time-consuming nature it is imperative that the most optimal predictors are used. Although there are many other job performance predictors researched such as personality, age, education, or interest, industrial-organizational psychologists have found them not as strong and consistent as cognitive ability tests and structured interviews (Hunter and Hunter 1984). Unfortunately, most organizations fail to utilize both reliable predictors in tandem leading to missed opportunities. This entry summarizes some of the many findings, major takeaways, and future direction in the research of the validity of two predictors under the criterion of job performance.</p>
<p>Cognitive ability tests are an indispensable tool available to human resource specialists during the employee selection process. They evaluate key job necessities like job knowledge, memory, and planning (Hunter 1986). Due to their popularity in theory, many different types of these tests exist such as the Wonderlic Personnel Test, General Mental Aptitude Test (GMAT), and the Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal test. Unfortunately, however, a survey conducted in 2001 by the American Management Association found that only 19.7% of applicants are tested with cognitive ability tests. This surprisingly low number ensures questioning as to why companies miss out on properly evaluating prospects.</p>
<p>Relatively cheap to administer, the strong validity of cognitive ability tests in job performance prediction makes them an attractive option that can be used in organizations of all sizes. Their costs allow small companies to save money, while large companies can use them in a multiple hurdle approach for large applicant pools. They also serve to protect companies legally against discrimination in their selection process. Despite the valuable insight they provide into candidates, a thorough selection process is not complete without the addition of a structured interview.</p>
<p>Interviews are highly valid predictors of job performance, but they lack the standardization that comes with cognitive ability tests. Due to this, the structure of the interview is an important element that should not be overlooked. In 1994, Huffcutt and Arthur published a study which shows that structure is a moderator between interviews and job performance. Structured interviews are more standardized which allows for greater reliability than unstructured. This is especially important because interviews are prone to many types of bias including confirmation, stereotype, anchoring, and intuition. In addition, Huffcutt and Arthur (1994) also found that the validity of interviews is positively correlated with interview structure but reaches a ceiling point. With this in mind, selection processes that practice unstructured interviews are under-utilizing their resources for they take the same amount of time and costs as the more valid structured interview.</p>
<p>The use of cognitive ability tests and structured interviews is becoming more common and the norm, thus proper research is required to investigate the possible confounding factors that negatively affect their validity. The major focus of [our] meta-analysis research was to isolate the validities of cognitive ability and structured interviews on job performance, since the previous meta-analyses that attempt to compare the predictors do not test them under same-studies (Berry et al. 2007). In the efforts to reassess cognitive ability tests and structured interviews, possible moderating factors should be recorded as well including job complexity, age, interest, etc. While these factors have been studied to an extent, most studies do not compare them under same studies.</p>
<p>Regarding the commonality of cognitive ability tests and structured interview usage, new surveys need to be issued. Usage rates were unable to be found for interviews, and the American Management Association&rsquo;s report with cognitive ability is outdated. For cognitive ability tests, this is a major concern since they can be administered more easily through computers nowadays. This reduces the overall costs and time for the predictor, making them more assessible. More research needs to be done on the validity of cognitive ability tests so companies will become aware to take advantage of them. Interviews are also moving towards electronic, so research needs to measure the differences they have regarding job performance. The video process may affect or reveal different kinds of bias, and they may have differing validity compared to traditional structured interviews. Researching these differences may alter the direction of structured interviews and help companies decide whether it is worth flying prospects out or going with electronic for interviews.</p>
<p>Major takeaways from the research presented are the pros and cons of cognitive ability tests and interviews along with their importance to job selection. Each of the predictors have their uses but using them in conjunction is far superior than either alone. Talented individuals are a commodity that will greatly increase in value in the near future due to the development of technology, and these individuals can strengthen organizations by helping them reach goals, innovate, and stand apart in the industry. Employing the right predictors is of utmost importance, but also choosing the most cost-effective ones as well. By doing so, this will help organizations gain the competitive edge that will aid them in the long run.</p>
<p>&nbsp;</p>
<p align="center">References</p>
<p>AMA (2001). AMA Survey on Workplace Testing: Basic Skills, Job Skills, Psychological Measurement.&nbsp;<em>American Management Association</em>, 1-2. www.amanet.org/research/pdfs/bjp_2001.pdf.</p>
<p>Berry, C. M., Sackett, P. R., &amp; Landers, R. N. (2007). Revisiting interview&ndash;cognitive ability relationships: Attending to specific range restriction mechanisms in meta-analysis.&nbsp;<em>Personnel Psychology</em>,&nbsp;<em>60</em>, 837-874. doi:10.1111/j.1744-6570.2007.00093.x</p>
<p>Huffcutt, A. I., &amp; Arthur, W. (1994). Hunter and Hunter (1984) revisited: Interview validity for entry-level jobs.&nbsp;<em>Journal of Applied Psychology</em>, 79, 184-190. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.79.2.184</p>
<p>Hunter, J. E. (1986). Cognitive ability, cognitive aptitudes, job knowledge, and job performance.&nbsp;<em>Journal of Vocational Behavior</em>,&nbsp;<em>29</em>, 340-362. doi:10.1016/0001-8791(86)90013-8</p>
<p>Hunter, J. E., &amp; Hunter, R. F. (1984). Validity and utility of alternative predictors of job performance.&nbsp;<em>Psychological Bulletin</em>,&nbsp;<em>96</em>, 72-98. doi:10.1037//0033-2909.96.1.72</p>
<p>Exxon Company, U.S.A. (1973). Validity of a Selection Program for Refinery Technician Trainees.&nbsp;<em>Personnel Research</em>,&nbsp;<em>73</em>, 1-7. Unpublished research.</p>